so basically in this task we had to make a chat application using python socket programming. the program have two process one is client which is process A and other one is server which is process B. client will send message to server and server will reply back. we also had to add encryption to the messages so that if someone intercept the message they cant read it. so i implemented two encryption algorithm which is caesar cipher and xor cipher. both are symmetric encryption which means same key is used for encrypt and decrypt. i only used socket library in python which is builtin no need to install anything. 
socket is basically like a pipe between two programs that allow them to send and receive data. in our program client connect to server using socket and they can chat with each other. we used TCP socket which make sure all the data arrive correctly and in order. TCP is better than UDP for chat application because we dont want to lose any message. the connection happen in steps, server create socket and bind to localhost port 900 then server call listen() to wait for someone to connect. then client create socket and call connect() to reach server. server call accept() and connection is done. now both side can send and receive message and when someone type exit both side close the socket.
if we dont use encryption then the message we send over network is just plain text. so anyone who is in same network can use packet sniffer tool and see all the message we are sending, so thats why we add encryption. when message is encrypted it look like random bytes so even if someone capture it they cant understand anything without the key. for example if i send hello without encryption anyone can see the word hello. but with encryption it become something like random bytes which nobody can read without the key.
caesar cipher is one of the oldest encryption. basically it just shift every byte by a fixed number. i used shift of 7 so every byte value get 7 added to it. the % 256 is there because byte value can only be between 0 to 255 so if it go above 255 it wrap back to 0. for decrypt we just minus 7 instead of adding. thats it very simple. example with letter H which is byte value 72, encrypt is 72 + 7 = 79 and decrypt is 79 - 7 = 72 which is back to H.
XOR stand for exclusive or. it is a bitwise operation that work on individual bits. the rule is simple if two bits are same result is 0 if two bits are different result is 1. the most important thing about xor is that it is its own reverse meaning if you xor something twice with same key you get back the original. so same function work for both encrypt and decrypt. i have a key which is the word secretkey. for each byte in the message we xor it with corresponding byte from the key. the i % len(XOR_KEY) is because key is only 9 character but message can be longer so the key will repeat itself. for example byte 79 xor with 115 give 60. and then 60 xor with 115 again give back 79. thats how it reverse itself.
i used both caesar and xor together because using two encryption make it more harder to break. if attacker somehow figure out one layer they still have to break through the other layer. when we encrypt we do caesar first then xor on top of that. so message go through caesar first which shift all bytes by 7 then the result go through xor which mix it further with the key secretkey. when we decrypt we have to reverse the order so xor first then caesar. we undo xor first to get back the caesar encrypted version then we undo caesar to get back the original message. for example message Hi is bytes 72 and 105, after caesar it become 79 and 112, after xor it become 60 and 21. this is what get sent over network. receiver do xor decrypt to get 79 and 112 then caesar decrypt to get 72 and 105 which is Hi again.
the application work like this, server start first and wait for client to connect on port 900. once client connect they can start chatting. client type message it get encrypted and sent. server receive encrypted bytes and decrypt it and show the message. server type reply it get encrypted and sent back. client receive and decrypt the reply and show it. this keep going until someone type exit. the important thing is at no point the actual text message travel through the network. only the encrypted bytes travel so network is secure.
